📄 docs: A guide to porting tests (#1165)
ethereum/execution-spec-tests: docs/dev/porting_legacy_tests.md

# A Guide to Porting Legacy Ethereum Tests to EEST

## Background

> EEST is the successor to [ethereum/tests](https://github.com/ethereum/tests) (aka "legacy tests"), a repository that defined EVM test cases from the [Frontier](https://ethereum.org/en/history/#frontier) phase up to and including [The Merge](https://ethereum.org/en/history/#paris). These test cases are specified as YAML (and occasionally JSON) files in the [`./src/`](https://github.com/ethereum/tests/tree/develop/src) sub-directory. JSON test fixtures, which are fully-populated tests that can be executed against clients, are generated using [ethereum/retesteth](https://github.com/ethereum/retesteth). These JSON artifacts are regenerated when needed and added to the repository, typically in the [`./GeneralStateTests/`](https://github.com/ethereum/tests/tree/develop/GeneralStateTests) sub-directory.

Reviewer: confusion here as legacy tests are in ethereum/legacytests

    ├── coverage_PATCH.lcov
    ├── DIFF
    ├── difflog.txt
    ├── PATCH
    └── PATCH_TESTS
```

Here `BASE`is legacy tests, `PATCH` is the ported test, and `DIFF` is the coverage difference on EVMONE. Open `evmtest_coverage/coverage/DIFF/index.html` in browser:

![Annotated coverage](../img/annotated-coverage.jpg)

| Label |                                   Description                                   |
| ----- | :-----------------------------------------------------------------------------: |
| `LBC` |    **Lost base coverage:** Code that was tested before, but is untested now.    |
| `UBC` |  **Uncovered baseline code:** Code that was untested before and untested now.   |
| `GBC` | **Gained baseline coverage:** Code that was untested before, but is tested now. |
| `CBC` |    **Covered baseline code:** Code that was tested before and is tested now.    |

Follow the hyperlinks for lost base coverage (`LBC`) to address coverage gaps. Here is an example coverage loss:

![Missing legacy coverage](../img/legacy-coverage-loss.png)

> Lost line coverage from a coverage report. In this case, caused by a missing invocation of `CALLDATALOAD`.

!!! note "Expected coverage loss"

>     EEST uses [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/stable/), a Python testing library, for testing Ethereum specifications, while legacy tests relied on the EVM to handle much of the execution. This difference can lead to coverage gaps. EEST favors dynamic contract creation for each test vector, while legacy tests preferred a single static contract with multiple test vectors determined by transaction input data.

Reviewer: as a note here that yul tests or some tests used calldataload that might no longer needed when designing a test with python. but we should always investigate if an opcode is not covered anymore to see if its ok

While automating the conversion of the remaining YAML (or JSON) test cases to Python is possible, manually porting individual test cases offers several benefits:

- Reducing the number of test cases by combining multiple YAML (or JSON) cases into a single Python test function using parametrization.
- Potentially improving coverage by parametrizing the Python version.
- Producing higher quality code and documentation, which are typically clearer than an automated conversion.
- Ensuring better organization of tests within the `./tests` folder of execution-spec-tests by fork and EIP.

## Porting an original test

1. Select one or more YAML test cases from ethereum/tests to port and create an issue in this repository AND comment on [this tracker issue.](https://github.com/ethereum/execution-spec-tests/issues/972)

2. [Add a new test](../writing_tests/index.md) in the appropriate fork folder, following the guidelines for [choosing a test type.](../writing_tests/types_of_tests.md#deciding-on-a-test-type)

> 3. Submit a PR with the ported tests:
> 
>    1. Add the list of ported YAML files to [`converted-ethereum-tests.txt`](https://github.com/ethereum/execution-spec-tests/blob/1b30c336eae6b0746ea4db441ac74406f2fb2322/converted-ethereum-tests.txt).
>    2. Open a PR to remove the ported tests from the _original tests_ repository.

Reviewer 2: The sub-list requires extra indentation, it currently renders as:
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e0ebb276-14f8-42fa-bc85-ea4c0379cac4)

I think that this fix to our markdownlint config should catch this (not yet in main):
https://github.com/ethereum/execution-spec-tests/pull/1172/commits/19a041ca391f84c9f8a9acaf3314a76c87b9ffaa#diff-39aecbc26791dd03b9a4fdc1f856769ea73308294b7111d70f279ac9bdef35bdR8

Feel free to add it with this PR, if you're motivated it and it catches it :slightly_smiling_face: 

```suggestion
3. Submit a PR with the ported tests:

     1. Add the list of ported YAML files to [`converted-ethereum-tests.txt`](https://github.com/ethereum/execution-spec-tests/blob/1b30c336eae6b0746ea4db441ac74406f2fb2322/converted-ethereum-tests.txt).
     2. Open a PR to remove the ported tests from the _original tests_ repository.
```

>    2. Open a PR to remove the ported tests from the _original tests_ repository.

Reviewer 2: Additionally, I think we can write and link to `ethereum/tests` here instead of referring to "original tests".

> See also: 📄 [Getting started with EEST.](../getting_started/repository_overview.md)

## Filling tests

EEST uses pytest to run tests against EELS (an EVM implementation for testing). This process is known as "filling" and verifies the assertions in your tests. You can use the fill CLI for this. For example, see how to fill the `PUSH` opcode.

```shell
uv run tests/frontier/opcodes/test_push.py
```

See also: 📄 [Documentation for the `fill` command.](../filling_tests/filling_tests_command_line.md)

> If the tests can't currently be filled, please explain the issue (feel free to also [open a Discussion](https://github.com/ethereum/execution-spec-tests/discussions/new?category=general)).

## Debugging tests

> By default, EVM logs are stored in the `logs` folder at the repository root. You can check the `output` folder to review transaction results. If needed, review a previous PR that ported tests (e.g., [the PR porting the `PUSH` opcode](https://github.com/ethereum/execution-spec-tests/pull/975)).

Reviewer 2: I just added a new label `port` for ported tests and labelled the ones I could find. Could you add a link to that so people can find related PRs easily?
https://github.com/ethereum/execution-spec-tests/pulls?q=is%3Apr+label%3Aport
But do please leave a link to this as an example (which is not tooo long or complicated).

Reviewer 2: If you think the label should be more descriptive, let me know.

> ## Test coverage

Reviewer 2: Extremely helpful section, thank uuuuuu!

> It's crucial that ported tests maintain coverage parity with _original tests_. This ensures that no critical functions are left untested and prevents introducing bugs. A CI workflow automatically checks for coverage.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It's crucial that ported tests maintain coverage parity with _original tests_. This ensures that no critical functions are left untested and prevents the introduction of bugs. A CI workflow automatically checks for coverage.
```

    ├── DIFF
    ├── difflog.txt
    ├── PATCH
    └── PATCH_TESTS
```

Here `BASE`is _original tests_, `PATCH` is the ported test, and `DIFF` is the coverage difference on EVMONE. Open `evmtest_coverage/coverage/DIFF/index.html` in browser:

![Annotated coverage](../img/annotated-coverage.jpg)

| Label |                                   Description                                   |
| ----- | :-----------------------------------------------------------------------------: |
| `LBC` |    **Lost base coverage:** Code that was tested before, but is untested now.    |
| `UBC` |  **Uncovered baseline code:** Code that was untested before and untested now.   |
| `GBC` | **Gained baseline coverage:** Code that was untested before, but is tested now. |
| `CBC` |    **Covered baseline code:** Code that was tested before and is tested now.    |

Follow the hyperlinks for lost base coverage (`LBC`) to address coverage gaps. Here is an example coverage loss:

![Missing original coverage](../img/original-coverage-loss.png)

> Lost line coverage from a coverage report. In this case, caused by a missing invocation of `CALLDATALOAD`.

!!! note "Expected coverage loss"

>     EEST uses [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/stable/), a Python testing library, for testing Ethereum specifications, while _original tests_ relied on the EVM to handle much of the execution. This difference can lead to coverage gaps. EEST favors dynamic contract creation for each test vector, while _original tests_ preferred a single static contract with multiple test vectors determined by transaction input data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    EEST uses [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/stable/), a popular Python testing framework, to help orchestrate testing Ethereum specifications, while _original tests_ relied on large, static contracts and the EVM to handle much of the execution. This difference can lead to coverage gaps. EEST favors dynamic contract creation for each test vector, while _original tests_ preferred a single static contract with multiple test vectors determined by transaction input data.
```
